Okay.
Because we did get, I remember at the end of the last interview, you told us in pretty
much detail what the voyage from yesterday was about and so forth.
Did I?
Yeah, we have material on that.
I think you were just finishing it up.
Okay.
First of all, I noticed in Locust that you received the Prometheus Award for the voyage
from yesterday.
And I wondered what that award was.
Anything?
I wondered what that award consisted of, what it was given for.
It's given by the Libertarian Party every year for the fictional novel which they believe
best depicts the ideals and values that their party stands for.
That's about all I know.
I think they're pretty much, they're strongly for individual freedom and the individual responsibility
that goes with it and the minimum government intervention in business and in the life of
the private individual that's consistent with a secure and sanely functioning society.
In other words, the award is not just for a science fiction novel, yours just happened
to be one.
I believe so.
Yeah, okay.
Okay, is this word pronounced Chironians or Chironians?
I pronounce it Chironians, but I couldn't really say Chironians is wrong.
Different people have different customs.
Sometimes I remember when we did Latin at school the pronunciation of certain Latin
verbs depended on which school you went to.
I think it's pretty much the same with this.
I pronounce it Chironians.
Okay, my question would be to the Chironians, they desired physical contact with Earthmen,
I guess seemingly to connect with their roots.
And I wondered, do you think it's possible therefore to construct a machine race society
off Earth while our genes allow it?
I don't see why not.
The fact that I had them behaving that way, it's not necessarily a prophecy or a prediction
or a statement of anything that's inevitable.
It was just a trait that made them more interesting as thinking, feeling beings and gave an underlying
motivation for a lot of their actions.
So it was purely arbitrary to help to tie the plot together.
It wasn't a prediction based on anything I know that's true of us.
Okay, this is a picky question.
I'm not even sure this would go in the final interview, but I was concerned in the...
It was fairly early in the book when the two, the Chironians and the Earthmen, they're
blending, they're getting together.
And there was a bar scene where the killing occurred.
Okay.
Okay, and the Chironian woman was being molested.
She pulled out a pistol and shot the guy in the leg.
Then there was an altercation and one of the Earthmen was killed.
It seemed a little strange to me, given their society, that they were carrying guns.
Right.
Well, I realized they have that huge weapon and they're pretty...
They're well able to take care of themselves.
But I wouldn't have thought that they would need those guns against each other.
Were they carrying them just specifically because Earthmen were around?
I think that was explained, is that it was a habit that went back several generations,
but they carried them against each other.
There were some talks in another part of the book.
You see, there's never any...
They're personalities, they're individuals.
They are the result of the same dealing out and mixing of human gene sets as the rest of us.
They're not in any way a super race.
They don't all have an IQ.
They aren't all ethically and morally superior and rational in their behavior.
In other words, I wasn't really trying to depict the utopia.
I don't really like stories about utopia.
I think they're hideously boring places to read about.
And, yeah, because of the accident...
Well, not really the accident, because of the circumstances surrounding their origins
and the isolation of their society from the way many of the problems of our society are passed on through the ages,
it so happened that many of the things that we would regard as problems had been solved,
or at least cease to be problems, but I wasn't trying to suggest it was some utopia,
and everybody always acted rational and everybody always acted compassionately and sympathetically
and did the good thing.
I think that's kind of a cop-out, right?
Sometimes trying to depict these advanced societies,
and you say, well, how do you solve the problem about the drunk next to you in the bar
who insists on starting a fight or somebody who tries to...
People who insist on being obnoxious and bothering other people,
and they get around having to solve the problem by never having people act that way.
Well, that's unrealistic. People are going to act that way.
And in their society, they just defended themselves against such eventualities
because there was no tradition or authority to tell them they shouldn't.
And I guess by the time the Earth people showed up, it was never a custom
that it's like wearing a hat or a pair of boots that have been handed down.
Although I think your point is probably a very good one.
It could be that with the Earth people around in their ways,
quite a number of people who left their gutter home for the last few years
and just used it as a sous-videy, it might take it out of where it can carry it around,
again, just in case. I think that's very likely.
Well, I would specifically say so in the book.
Okay, that's good. Okay, let me skip to the Code of the Lifemaker.
Of course, there you return or you continue with one of the themes that I think you pursue
in much of your fiction, intelligent machines or so forth.
I guess now this is almost a rhetorical question, so I think I know the answer to it.
But one of your contentions in the novel is that machines or manufactured artifacts
can have life which is just as valid as human life, right?
Okay, now we normally think of machines as free from human prejudices
and emotional weaknesses and so forth.
It should give the Taloids normal human shortcomings in religion and mysticism and so forth.
And I wondered why you did that.
I don't think the fact that those traits exist in us, I would suggest isn't a consequence
of our intelligence being supported by carbon chemistry hardware.
It's a consequence of our intelligence and our human characteristics,
including our aggressiveness, our jealousies and a lot of the things that can cause problems
in the relatively secure environment of a civilized culture having originated
in a competitive, survival-based evolutionary environment.
It was the way in which we were, the way in which we evolved as beings that determined those traits.
It had nothing to do with the hardware that our mental processes happened to be supported by.
In the case of the Taloids, they, because of the beginnings that they come from,
which we described in the prologue, they had evolved competitively in a survival-oriented fashion
in exactly the same way as we had.
I think my suggestion, I think it's quite a fairly valid one, is that they would have evolved similar traits
and strengths and weaknesses, beliefs, systems, exactly the way we did
because they had evolved them to serve exactly the same purposes.
The fact that their faculties were supported on electronic hardware and ours
is supported on carbon chemistry hardware, to my mind, is completely immaterial.
In other words, I guess that actually giving in those kinds of human traits
is sort of reinforcing the notion that there's no, doesn't have to be any essential difference
between carbon-based and machine life.
Exactly.
I mean, the fact that we call thinking is a very complex function of the nervous system
that's evolved over millions of years, but I suggest it's an emergent property
of the level of complexity and the way in which that complexity is organized
at the highest level of the human brain.
It's nothing to do with the fact that down at the bottom level of the hardware
we happen to be talking about mechanical neurons instead of mechanical electronic chips.
You point to that, it doesn't make a lot of difference, which any, to try and demystify the whole topic
I would reverse the normal way the question's asked and say, if, as is demands to be obvious,
if a system exists that's capable of supporting all of the operations we normally refer to
in everyday speech when we use the word thinking, and that system happens to have come from naturally evolved origins,
is there any reason to suppose that a system of comparable complexity and organization
that happens to have come from some other origins shouldn't be capable of doing right wise?
My answer is there's no reason to suppose that that's true.
Another part of it, of course, was it was kind of a little writer's license in that here we have these machines
and their culture, and obviously they were very human-like in some of their emotions
and some of the ways they did evolve, that's quite deliberate of course to enable the reader to relate more closely to them.
If we made them totally alien and maybe building totally different representations of world models and self-images
it could be very clever, but you'd lose most readers completely.
They'd just say, well, it was describing some aliens out of concepts, I couldn't understand it.
So I kind of deliberately bet that way a little because it is fiction after all,
and the object is to entertain human beings whether or not it's about machines.
Okay, one of the things I appreciated about the novel, I enjoyed it and I agree with it, was to me it had a pretty sharp satiric edge to it.
As a small example of little touches, one of the Taloids, I think his name was Gruirk,
he enters a city on a steendonk, he's preaching words of faith from the life-maker.
I wondered if you were just having fun with something like that or are you seriously tearing something down?
Oh, obviously, I'm in fun.
Okay.
Now some of these are rhetorical, I think I know the answers, but why Zambendorf is one of the protagonists?
He's a con man who operates with alleged mystical powers and so forth, something that you must personally detest.
Correct.
So I've got the question.
Well, why do you make him one of the protagonists? That we see much of what's happening through his eyes?
I didn't.
When I started to write this book, the original protagonist was Jerry Massey, the psychologist, and the conjurer.
Okay?
Right.
And Jerry Massey was originally supposed to be the protagonist, and I had 20 pages of, excuse me, 20 chapters of the book written,
and it wasn't working, so I tore them all up and started all over again.
The reason it wasn't working, what happens when you start to write a novel?
One of the signs that it's going right, sometimes I go to science fiction conventions, I sit on panels,
and the panels are very frequently on scientific subjects and the kinds of things that are speculated about in science fiction.
But also, I just tried to swat a fly that's bothering me.
Some of them are on writing itself, being a writer and how to sell you stuff and things like that.
I left comfortable on those panels because I'm not sure of the value of all this advice that professionals throw out and would be writers,
you know, reverently absorbed and no doubt. I think a lot of it is luck.
But so many of these things are just gut-feel.
One of the arts of writing a book, I guess, is knowing where to draw the line of, where do you stop fiddling around with it?
And mail it off to the editor.
Nothing in nature is linear and one of the most universal nonlinear functions is the law of diminishing returns.
And as you put more and more effort into a book, the extra improvement that you buy for your time gets less and less.
And you can fiddle around trying to get something perfect and start to death in the meantime.
At the other end, you can take far too little care and mail off a half-baked set of ideas that don't stand a hope in hell of getting sold by,
at least not to any decent publisher.
And somewhere between the two, there's this optimum level and all I can say is gut-feel.
I don't know of any list of conditions you can check off and say, you know, check the boxes and then it's ready to send.
And when it comes to characters, one of the things that the gut feels that you get when you know the book is going right,
is when the characters kind of come to life in your mind and start to take over the story and they start to do things their way.
And it means that they are acquiring real personalities themselves and they're doing the things you know they would do.
And you say, how do you know so-and-so would do that?
Well, I just know him and it's like the person you sat next to in the office for the last three years, somebody cracks a joke and you say,
hey, Harry would love that. You know Harry, you know the way you think.
And it got to about 20 chapters and it just, you know, the characters were just nasty, were just not working.
He was not doing anything. He was wandering around as a passive observer and listener.
He was watching what other people were doing and listening to what other people were saying.
So he was just a roving observer acting on behalf of the reader.
And it's just not terrifying. It didn't feel right.
And one of the, when you decided on a setting for a story to write about, how do you decide who's going to be the protagonist anyway?
One good principle to follow is that to ask who is most affected by the outcome of the story or who most drives the story,
whose actions are most responsible for the story coming out the way it is.
And if somebody clearly stands out in that role, that's a good candidate for the protagonist.
And after 20 chapters it was pretty obvious it wasn't nasty.
And yet it just seemed to be Xamadoff.
And I suppose interesting stories to write about are periods in an individual's life where the person is changed,
their outlook on life is changed, their values have changed.
They come out of the story visibly different in ways from when they went in.
Well, that's probably an interesting period in their life to write about.
And they're the obvious protagonist for that particular story, and that's the way it worked out in this case.
And whether I happen to have a lot of time for ESP and so-called paranormal phenomena is beside the point.
And in any case, why should that disqualify the character from being my protagonist if I happen not to agree with him?
I mean plenty of people like, oh Frederick Forsythe in the day of the Jackal, and a lot of books we could name it,
they're here as a protagonist, as maybe a murderer or an assassin.
That certainly doesn't mean that the author of the book is advocating murder or assassination as a pastime.
Okay, good. I've only got one more major question.
And that would involve, oh let's say, works in progress, books coming out in the near future.
Could you give me a little statement on that?
Yeah, about halfway through the next book, it's different from the others, but they're all different from each other.
I don't think any of them have variations on the same theme.
We've had one on intelligence computers and one on time travel.
One on aliens and so forth.
This one is, we haven't had an alternate universe story yet, so that's what this one is.
And it gets mixed up with World War II.
Most of it takes place between the beginning of 1939 and the end of 1942.
And the characters include Franklin Roosevelt, Albert Einstein, Winston Churchill, Enrico Fermi, Edward Teller, and a whole list of names like that.
Oh, is it the kind of thing we ought to talk too much about in advance?
Probably not, I guess.
Let's just say that the official version has it that the Manhattan Project dealt with developing the Fish and Bomb,
and Einstein's latter years were spent wrestling with an unsolved problem in unified field theory.
Well, both those stories are true as far as they went, as far as they go.
However, there was a little more to it than that, which is what this book goes into.
Okay, good. I don't suppose it has any title yet then?
No, it doesn't. No, the title is always the last thing I put on the book.
I just have a working label in the meantime that I simply use to refer to the book, and at the moment it's just a computer file name.
Okay.
Yeah, we had a very good interview with you before, so really as short as this is, that will be sufficient.
Is there anything else you'd like to add or bring up or have put in the book or anything like that?
Nothing that comes readily to mind, but if you find you have further questions, feel free to give me a call.
Okay, that's good. Listen, we are regular attendees at the AggieCon, which we understand you're going to be at next year.
Yep, that's what they tell me.
So we will be there to meet you finally.
I look forward to that.
We'll send you a copy of this book when it's published. It's going to be probably at least a year.
Okay, well, I don't expect that these things don't happen overnight.
Yeah, and later on when we get the manuscript transcribed, of course we're having typists transcribe the interviews,
and when we do everything ready, introductions written and so forth, we'll maybe get back in touch with you and see if you have an extra picture.
You did already send it, didn't you?
I haven't sent it yet.
Oh, that's right. Okay.
Yeah, so when we...
We'll be in town for the last two weeks, I've only just got back.
Yeah, in the future when we need it, we'll go ahead and send you a stamped envelope or something,
and if you wouldn't bother, it wouldn't be a bother, you can send us one.
I appreciate that.
I'll get a photograph off to you today or tomorrow.
Okay, then thank you, Mr. Rogen. We sure appreciate your time.
Okay, I appreciate your interest.
Okay, take care.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye now.